<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">

<p align="justify">*Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS)* is a large-eddy simulation (LES) code for low-speed flows, with an emphasis on smoke and heat transport from fires.

*Smokeview (SMV)* is a visualization program used to display the output of FDS and [http://cfast.nist.gov CFAST] simulations.

*FDS+Evac* is the evacuation simulation module for FDS.</p>

</font>

<br>

== Download FDS-SMV for Windows, Mac, and Linux ==

[http://code.google.com/p/fds-smv/wiki/Downloads_Overview?tm=2 http://fds-smv.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/FDS/trunk/FDS-SMV_website/images/button_download.png]

<br>

== Documentation and Support ==

<table cellpadding="5">
<tr><td align="center">
[https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0B-EZ4HlrI6VDUWtRN1N0MmM5c1U#list http://fds-smv.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/FDS/trunk/FDS-SMV_website/images/button_manuals.png]
</td><td>
<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
FDS and Smokeview User, Technical, Verification, and Validation Guides.
</font>
</td></tr>
<tr><td align="center">
[https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups#!forum/fds-smv http://fds-smv.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/FDS/trunk/FDS-SMV_website/images/button_discussion.png]
</td><td>
<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
Mailing list for general discussion, questions, and feedback.
</font>
</td></tr>
<tr><td align="center">
[http://code.google.com/p/fds-smv/issues/list http://fds-smv.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/FDS/trunk/FDS-SMV_website/images/button_issue.png]
</td><td>
<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
Submit cases to the Issue Tracker to report specific bugs, problems, or enhancement requests.
</font>
</td></tr>
<tr><td align="center">
[http://code.google.com/p/fds-smv/wiki/Wiki_Overview?tm=6 http://fds-smv.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/FDS/trunk/FDS-SMV_website/images/button_wiki.png]
</td><td>
<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
Information on FDS-SMV development, third-party tools, and other resources.
</font>
</td></tr>
</table>

<br>

== Third-party Tools ==

<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
  View a list of [Third_party_Tools third-party tools] provided by the FDS-SMV community, including graphical user interfaces and various pre- and post-processing tools.
</font>

<br>

== !YouTube Channel ==

<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
  Visit our [http://www.youtube.com/fdssmokeview FDS-SMV YouTube Channel] for tutorials and examples of FDS and Smokeview.
</font>

<br>

== FDS Validation Test Reports ==

<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
  View the [https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0B-EZ4HlrI6VDT2R5SjNFOGtIdTg&usp=sharing#list collection of publicly available reports] for experimental data sets referenced in the FDS Validation Guide.
</font>

<br>

== Research Road Maps ==

<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
  Read the [http://code.google.com/p/fds-smv/wiki/FDS_Road_Map?tm=6 FDS Road Map] and the [http://code.google.com/p/fds-smv/wiki/Smokeview_Road_Map?tm=6 Smokeview Road Map] to learn about ongoing research plans to advance the capabilities of FDS and Smokeview.
</font>

<br>

== FDS+Evac ==

<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">
  Visit the [http://www.vtt.fi/proj/fdsevac/?lang=en FDS+Evac website at VTT] for documentation, examples, verification, and validation of FDS+Evac.
</font>

<br>

== FDS-SMV 6 Beta Testing ==

<font face="calibri,helvetica,arial,sans-serif" size="3">

 FDS 6 is ready for beta testing. You can access the FDS-SMV release candidate [http://code.google.com/p/fds-smv/downloads/list here]. Note that the installation of FDS 6 is in a parallel folder to FDS 5. FDS 6 can be accessed by typing `fds` at the command prompt, whereas the currently installed version of FDS 5 can still be invoked with `fds5`.

 As part of the FDS 6 beta release, you can access [https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0B_wB1pJL2bFQaDJaOFNnUDR4LXM#list nightly versions of the FDS-SMV documentation/manuals].

 These manuals are generated automatically each night by the continuous integration testing process (Firebot), which is described in detail in the FDS Configuration Management Plan. You can view the status of recent nightly builds on the [http://code.google.com/p/fds-smv/wiki/Firebot_Build_Status Firebot Build Status] Wiki Page.

 <b>Important</b>: _The guides linked above are unofficial documentation and are subject to change during the FDS 6 beta testing period. Please include the *SVN repository revision number and date* of the guide when referring to the nightly manuals in posts to the Issue Tracker or Discussion Group._
</font>

<br>

<font size=1>Disclaimer: FDS and Smokeview are developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) of the United States Department of Commerce. FDS and Smokeview are free software developed through the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) by employees of the Federal Government in the course of their official duties. Pursuant to Title 17, Section 105 of the United States Code, this work is not subject to copyright protection and is in the Public Domain. NIST assumes no responsibility whatsoever for use by other parties of its source code, documentation or compiled executables, and makes no guarantees, expressed or implied, about its quality, reliability, or any other characteristic.</font>